Characteristic Mamba
A 2D Selective Transport State Space Model for Vision
Core idea. Standard Vision Mamba gets long-range transport by forcing an image
onto one or more scan paths. Characteristic Mamba keeps the image on its native
2D lattice and performs the recurrence directly on the plane: each patch pulls its
next state from an upstream location determined by a learned 2D transport field, then
applies a selective state update.

2D patch lattice
local geometry preserved

learned 2D
transport field
+ selective
state update
no 1D scan path

updated 2D state
directly on
the plane

What this document gives you. A self-contained methodology section designed so
you can implement the model: notation, equations, algorithm, complexity, practical
design choices, and an ablation plan. The focus is a strong, defensible mechanism
rather than cosmetic architectural changes.

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

1 Methodology Overview
Let an image be embedded into a patch lattice
X ∈ RB×H×W ×D ,

N = HW,

where B is the batch size, H × W is the spatial grid of patches, and D is the channel dimension. The
central goal is to preserve the native 2D geometry of the image while retaining the selective state-space
flavor that makes Mamba attractive.
The proposed block contains three ingredients:
1. 2D characteristic transport. Each spatial position predicts where its next state should come
from on the image plane. This is a recurrence on the lattice itself, not on a flattened 1D scan path.
2. Selective state update. The transported state is filtered by input-dependent retention and
injection gates, preserving the selective state-space principle.
3. Optional local phase rotation. Paired channels are rotated in a small complex-style plane to
keep the useful “oscillatory mixing” intuition from V4 without relying on fragile FFT or exact PDE
machinery.
Main modeling choice. A scan is just a recurrence along a fixed path. Characteristic Mamba
replaces hand-crafted scan paths with learned 2D characteristics. This preserves spatial structure
and still gives directed long-range information transport after several recurrent substeps.

2 State Representation
We use a paired state representation inspired by the complex-plane intuition from V4, but implemented
with ordinary real tensors for hardware stability:
Ht = (Ut , Vt ),

Ut , Vt ∈ RB×H×W ×Ds ,

where Ds is the hidden state width inside the block. The paired channels can be interpreted as
two coupled state components. They are produced from the current token features through a linear
projection:
(U0 , V0 ) = Π(X).
This representation keeps the beneficial “wave-like” coupling idea from V4, but no exact complex
arithmetic is required.

3 Learned 2D Characteristic Transport
3.1 Transport field
At each block, predict a 2D transport field on the patch lattice. The simplest version predicts a
per-location velocity
v(p) = (vx (p), vy (p)) ∈ R2 ,

p ∈ {1, . . . , H} × {1, . . . , W }.
1

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

A stronger and more physically structured version predicts a scalar stream function ψ, then derives a
divergence-free velocity field:




v(p) = ∇⊥ ψ(p) = ∂y ψ(p), −∂x ψ(p) .
The stream-function parameterization is recommended because it encourages area-preserving transport
and makes the spatial-flow story cleaner. In practice, compute finite differences with fixed kernels or
small convolutions.
Recommended implementation. Predict G flow groups instead of a single field. Each group
controls Ds /G channels. This gives richer anisotropic transport without quadratic cost. Typical
starting values: G ∈ {4, 8}.

3.2 From velocity to routing weights
To keep the block TPU-friendly and strictly linear-time, avoid arbitrary all-to-all warping. Instead,
convert the predicted velocity into a small set of routing weights over a fixed neighborhood N (p), for
example the 4-neighbor or 8-neighbor stencil.
For the 4-neighbor stencil N (p) = {left, right, up, down}, define direction logits as
ℓright (p) = κvx (p),

ℓleft (p) = −κvx (p),

ℓdown (p) = κvy (p),

ℓup (p) = −κvy (p),

where κ > 0 controls sharpness. The routing weights are
exp(ℓd (p))
,
d′ ∈N (p) exp(ℓd′ (p))

πd (p) = P

d ∈ N (p).

These weights say how strongly position p should pull information from each neighbor. For each state
tensor St ∈ {Ut , Vt }, define the transported state as
Sbt (p) =

X

πd (p) St (p + d).

d∈N (p)

This is the discrete 2D analogue of moving information along characteristics, but implemented using
only local gather-like operations.
Why this is not just another convolution. The neighborhood is fixed, but the routing weights
are input-dependent and direction-dependent. A standard convolution applies the same kernel
everywhere; here, every location chooses its own transport direction at every forward pass.

4 Selective State Update on the Plane
After transport, each location updates its state using input-dependent selective gates. Let Z(p) denote
the current block input feature at position p. Predict three quantities from Z using lightweight pointwise
projections:
A(p) = σ(WA Z(p)),
B(p) = σ(WB Z(p)),
Θ(p) = Wθ Z(p).
Here:
2

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

• A(p) is the retention gate,
• B(p) is the injection gate,
• Θ(p) is an optional phase angle used for channel-pair rotation.

4.1 Optional local phase rotation
To retain the most useful part of the V4 complex-plane intuition, apply a per-location channel-wise
rotation after transport:
bt − sin(Θ) ⊙ Vbt ,
U t = cos(Θ) ⊙ U
bt + cos(Θ) ⊙ Vbt .
V t = sin(Θ) ⊙ U

This preserves the “oscillatory mixing” flavor without claiming exact Schrödinger evolution.

4.2 Selective recurrence
Let (XU , XV ) = Γ(Z) be the input injection features. The update is
Ut+1 = A ⊙ U t + B ⊙ XU ,
Vt+1 = A ⊙ V t + B ⊙ XV .
This is the key Mamba-style ingredient: the state is not recomputed from scratch; it is selectively
propagated and selectively injected based on the current input.
Important claim discipline. This block is not exact unitary quantum evolution. The right
story is: 2D selective characteristic transport with optional phase-like channel coupling.
That wording is strong, honest, and implementation-aligned.

5 Full Block
A complete Characteristic Mamba block can be written as follows.

5.1 Local preprocessing
First apply normalization and a lightweight local mixer:
e = SiLU(DWConv3×3 (InProj(LN(X)))).
X

This stage is cheap and gives the transport module good local features to condition on.

5.2 Recurrent transport loop
Run the characteristic transport recurrence for T substeps:
e
(U0 , V0 ) = Π(X),
e
(Ut+1 , Vt+1 ) = Fchar (Ut , Vt , X),

3

t = 0, . . . , T − 1.

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

5.3 Projection back to token space
After T substeps, map the paired state back to the model width:
Y = Wo [UT ∥VT ] + D ⊙ X,
where D is a learned skip scale. The block output can then be passed to the next stage exactly like a
standard Mamba-style backbone block.

6 Algorithm
Algorithm 1: Characteristic Mamba block
1. Input tokens X ∈ RB×H×W ×D .
e
2. Normalize and locally preprocess to obtain X.
e
3. Initialize paired state (U0 , V0 ) = Π(X).

4. For t = 0, . . . , T − 1:
e
4.1. Predict stream function ψ or velocity field v from X.

4.2. Convert v into neighborhood routing weights πd .
bt , Vbt ).
4.3. Transport the state: (U

4.4. Optionally rotate the paired channels by Θ.
4.5. Predict selective gates A, B and injection features (XU , XV ).
4.6. Update (Ut+1 , Vt+1 ) using the selective recurrence.
5. Concatenate (UT , VT ), project back, and add the residual skip.

7 Complexity Analysis
Let N = HW be the number of patches, Ds the state width, G the number of flow groups, and |N |
the neighborhood size (4 or 8). Then:
• transport routing costs O(N G) to predict and normalize,
• state transport costs O(N Ds |N |),
• selective gating and projection costs O(N Ds ).
Hence the recurrent transport loop is


O T · N · Ds · |N | ,
which is linear in the number of patches for fixed T and fixed neighborhood size. This preserves the
fundamental efficiency advantage you want over quadratic token-token attention.

4

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

Why this is a stronger linear-time story than scans. Multi-scan Vision Mamba gets longrange transport by forcing the recurrence to follow several hand-designed routes. Characteristic
Mamba keeps recurrence on the image plane itself and learns the transport direction per location.
The cost remains linear because each patch communicates through a constant-size local stencil at
each substep.

8 Implementation Blueprint
8.1 Recommended default design
Component

Recommendation

Why

State width Ds

Match the block expansion width or use Ds = D

Flow groups G

4 or 8

Neighborhood

4-neighbor first, then try 8-neighbor

Substeps T

2 to 4

Field parameterization

Stream function ψ if possible

Rotation

Keep it on for the main model, ablate it later

Gates

Sigmoid retention and injection gates

Keeps projection simple
early on
Adds directional
richness without large
cost
Easier and more
TPU-friendly
Enough to test directed
long-range transport
Gives a more structured
flow than arbitrary
vectors
Retains the V4 intuition
without fragile numerics
Closest to selective
state-space logic

8.2 Practical notes
Efficient TPU implementation.
• Prefer fixed-size neighbor routing over bilinear warping for the first version.
• Implement neighbor gathering with padding + shifted tensors or grouped depthwise operations.
• Keep all tensors real-valued; no FFT and no complex dtypes are required.
e to avoid redundant
• Predict transport, phase, and gates from the same local conditioning tensor X
compute.

5

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

8.3 Pseudo-code skeleton
def char_mamba_block(x):
z = local_preprocess(norm(x))
u, v = state_proj(z)
for t in range(T):
psi = stream_head(z)
# or a direct velocity head
vx, vy = stream_to_velocity(psi)
pi = velocity_to_routing(vx, vy)
u_hat = transport(u, pi)
v_hat = transport(v, pi)
theta = phase_head(z)
u_rot = cos(theta) * u_hat - sin(theta) * v_hat
v_rot = sin(theta) * u_hat + cos(theta) * v_hat
a = sigmoid(a_head(z))
b = sigmoid(b_head(z))
xu, xv = inj_proj(z)
u = a * u_rot + b * xu
v = a * v_rot + b * xv
y = out_proj(cat([u, v])) + skip_scale * x
return y

9 Why This Should Improve Over V4
V4 already showed that preserving 2D structure can work, but it appears to plateau because the local
spatial operator is too isotropic and too uniform. Characteristic Mamba changes the communication
law itself:
• Directed transport instead of isotropic mixing. Hard classes often require information to
travel along object-specific directions.
• Spatial recurrence on the plane. The state moves where the image says it should move, not
along a hand-crafted scan order.
• Selectable memory. The retention/injection gates keep the Mamba-style selectivity rather than
turning the block into a pure spatial smoother.
• Complexity discipline. The model gains long-range transport after several recurrent substeps
while keeping constant-size local communication at each step.

6

Characteristic Mamba Methodology

Implementation Blueprint

10 Ablation Plan You Should Run
Ablation

Question it answers

V4 vs Characteristic
Mamba
Fixed velocity vs
learned velocity
Arbitrary velocity vs
stream-function velocity
With vs without phase
rotation
4-neighbor vs
8-neighbor routing
1, 2, 4 transport
substeps
1 flow group vs 4 or 8
groups

Does learned 2D transport break the plateau?
Is adaptivity of the transport field necessary?
Does structured, divergence-free transport help?
Does the paired-state rotation matter beyond transport alone?
How much local routing richness is needed?
Are gains coming from longer recurrent transport depth?
Does channel-group-specific transport improve expressivity?

11 Final Positioning for the Paper
The strongest methodology story is not “we solved vision with a PDE” and not “we replaced attention
with another token mixer.” The strongest story is:
Characteristic Mamba performs selective state-space recurrence directly on the image
plane. It keeps the geometry of the 2D lattice, learns transport directions instead of using fixed
scan routes, and preserves linear-time complexity by restricting each update to a constant-size
neighborhood.
That framing is tight, implementation-aligned, and easy for a reviewer to understand.
Minimal version to build first. Start with: one stream-function field, 4-neighbor routing, 2
paired state tensors, 2–4 recurrent transport substeps, and simple sigmoid gates. Get this stable
first. After that, the most meaningful extension is flow groups, not random extra convolutions.

7

